# Web Applications part 3

In the last class, we ended with using Flask's render template. Flask uses the Jinja2 template engine (you can find all you need about template coding here http://jinja.pocoo.org/).

Flask is also built on werkzeug (http://werkzeug.pocoo.org/).

## The debug flag

The `debug` flag enables features useful while developing our code:
* Whenever we change our script code, the server will restart automatically to load our new code.
* Whenever there is an error, the web interface will display a full stack trace. (**Note:** Don't run production web services in this mode! Attackers can use debugging information to disclose confidential information or learn more about vulnerabilities in the application code.)
* We can put breakpoints in our code by simply adding a `raise` command to raise an exception.

When we see a traceback output, we can hover over the right side of one of the lines and you can jump to python command line at that location of the code. The  `dump` command (which dumps all the variables at the current position in the code) can be useful here.

## Updating our example from last class

I made significant updates to the files from last class (there was at least one error, and also some crud, in the css file)

* improved formatting
* more flexible layout (for adding additional features)

__NOTE__: see http://jinja.pocoo.org/docs/2.9/templates/

If you're looking to test and experiment with different css layouts, you can save yourself time by working with one of the available online sites that help you develop css by giving you a real-time view of your css results. For example, see http://www.cssdesk.com/64MKn to test out our css for this lecture.

### Let's dig a big deeper into routing

I've created a new version of our flask demo site: `mis407_wap.py`.

This new version demonstrates:

* We can send and receive parameters in the URL call. Note the `<name>` in the URL, which is sent to the `home()` method as the `name` parameter, if provided, and using `WEB_APP_NAME` as the default if `name` is not specified.

```python
@app.route('/')
@app.route('/<name>')
def home(name=WEB_APP_NAME):
    return render_template("home.html", content=name)
```

* We can send values to the template. Note we're sending the value of the `name` variable to the `render_template()` call's `content` parameter:

Reading a variable:

```python
@app.route('/')
@app.route('/<name>')
def home(name=WEB_APP_NAME):
    return render_template("home.html", content=name)
```

And then using it in our layout - the `{{ content }}` variable in the template will be replaced by the value we sent in the `render_template()` call's `content` parameter:

```html
{%extends "layout.html"%}
{%block content%}
<div class="home">
  <h1>{{ content }} Homepage</h1>
  <p>This is a test website</p>
</div>
{%endblock%}
```

* We can use URL filters to make sure we are converting our variable to the appropriate type. Note the `float:` and `int:` in front of the variables to filter inputs - this enables our `/add` route to add two values, either integers or floats:

```python
# set your about page here
@app.route('/add/<float:x>/<float:y>')
@app.route('/add/<float:x>/<int:y>')
@app.route('/add/<int:x>/<float:y>')
@app.route('/add/<int:x>/<int:y>')
def add(x, y):
    return render_template("add.html", content= '{} + {} = {}'.format(x, y, x+y))
```


* We can have multiple routes to a view:

```python
@app.route('/')
@app.route('/home')
@app.route('/home/<name>')
def home(name=WEB_APP_NAME):
    return render_template("home.html", content=name)
```

* We can generate content that is sent to our template:

```python
@app.route('/weather/')
@app.route('/weather/<name>')  # be sure to include both forward slashes
def weather(name='Ames'):
    return render_template("weather.html", content='Current temp is {:3.1f}.'.format(get_temp()))
```

Note: This service uses new code `weather.py` that makes an HTTP request to openweathermap.org to get weather data for Ames. It requires the `requests` python module to make an HTTP request, so you'll have to `pip install requests` if you don't already have the module installed.

Note 2: This service also uses the python module `markdown` to render `md` files as HTML. As with the `requests` module, you'll have to `pip install markdown` if you don't already have the module installed.

* Creating and processing a form for user input:

Forms are used to provide a way for users to enter data. One common form is a login form for a website. Let's create a form that is shown when the user browses to the `/login` URL. We need to tell Flask that we want to handle HTTP `GET` requests with this method that will present the login form:

```python
# Show the login form
@app.route('/login', methods=['GET'])
def login_page():
    return render_template("login_form.html")
```

The HTML form template goes into the `login_form.html` file:
```html
{%extends "layout.html"%}
{%block content%}
  <h1>Login to the MIS407 Website</h1>
    <h2>{{ content }}</h2>
    <form action="/login" method="POST">
    <label>Username:</label><input type="text" value="" name="user"/>
    <br/>
    <label>Password:</label><input type="password" value="" name="password" />
    <br/>
    <input type="submit" value="Login" />
  </form>
{%endblock%}
```

Now, to process the form: in the `<form>` element of the login form, we tell the browser to use an HTTP `POST` to the `/login` URL. The Flask code to process that form and do a simple check of the input:

```python
@app.route('/login', methods=['POST'])
def login():
    user = request.form['user']
    password = request.form['password']

    if user == 'ghelmer' and password == 'what':
        return render_template("login_ok.html", user=user)
    return render_template("login_form.html", content="Login Failed")
```

Note the use of `request.form['user']` to get the content of the `user` field in the form, and `request.form['password']` to get the `password` field. To enable this, we have to add `request` to the `import` statement at the top of the module:

```python
from flask import Flask, render_template, request
```

Finally, the `login_ok.html` template shows a successful login:
```html
{%extends "layout.html"%}
{%block content%}
  <h1>Login Succeeded!</h1>
  <p>Welcome, {{ user }}.</p>
{%endblock%}
```

## More on cascading style sheets

I've made significant updates to our layout and main.css files.

We won't cover CSS in any detail, but there are many good resources to be found on the internet.
http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.11/tutorial/css/

If you want to experiment with the css you see in this project, see here http://www.cssdesk.com/64MKn


## For further info

If you're going to do any amount of development in Flask you'll need to dig deeper into Jinja to understand the details surrounding the rendering of html files. There are many tutorials out there  (http://flask.pocoo.org/docs/0.11/tutorial/introduction/)

Though we won't be covering this topic, for a more complete view of what can be done with Flask, look at wtforms and how to create html forms. There are many examples out there ... https://wtforms.readthedocs.io/en/latest/ , https://pythonspot.com/flask-web-forms/ etc.
