# Namespaces

__Namespaces__ are the space in which names are stored. As we create new names, these names are added to our namespace. Any non-trivial program will have multiple namespaces. Python "scoping" rules help us implicitly organize namespaces. Namespaces are simply dictionaries of name object pairs; and a namespace is either in, or out of, scope. Scope is the current active namespace. Scoping is the process of managing and switching between these namespace contexts. Generally, namespaces can be accessed even when they are not in scope. This is accomplish being providing the name of the namespace as a qualifier, such as with modules.

We access names within namespaces using the following syntax.

```
<namespace>.somevar
```

You can query what's in the current scope by using the dir() function.

```
dir() #returns list of vars in current scope
```

One example of this is when we import a file (module). Each module (file) that we import into our program will have it's own namespace, offering a different scope which allows us to avoid name collisions.

We can query the content of a modules namespace using the `dir` command

``
dir(modulename)
``

Functions also have their own scope (and thus namespace), but, but they are anonymous (we can directly reference them) so keep in mind that we can't do the following:

```
<function_name>.somevar
```
__NOTE__: Namespace versus scope. These are often used inter-changeably. The subtle difference is that scope is a reference to the variables that are accessible, while namespace is the structure that hold name object pairs.

### Working with Scope

Scope is a concept that you should be familiar with from Java. It is the extent to which a namespace applies (in other languages we may refer to a namespace as a symbol table).

I think this concept is best illustrated through code.

```python
def f():
    somestr = "locally defined"  # Defined only in local context, or "namespace"
    print(somestr)
f()
print(somestr) # Error: Asking for a variable in the current namespace (global) that isn't here
```
Running this above code will produce an error, because the variable somestr is only local to the function. It is not known outside the functions scope.


```python
def outer_function():
    a = 20
    def inner_function():
        a = 30
        print('a =',a)

    inner_function()
    print('a =',a)
a = 10
outer_function()
print('a =',a)
```

Can you figure out (without running the code) what the output from the above code will be?

...it will be :

```
a = 30
a = 20
a = 10
```

We can think of each functions/methods and module as having a unique scope. As you can see from the code above, this scope (like it's own private namespace) allow us to easily manage a local context where we can ensure that any locally defined variables will not interfere with the original code that called the function.

Anytime we reference a variable, we initiate a search through a hierarchy -- starting with the local, then the one in which this local scope is within, etc... until we enter a global namespace. The global names space is the names space that is created when we first start our .py file for the module or program.

## Python's Global Statement

> "The global statement is a declaration which holds for the entire current code block. It means that the listed identifiers are to be interpreted as globals. It would be impossible to assign to a global variable without global, although free variables may refer to globals without being declared global."" (taken from https://docs.python.org/3/reference/simple_stmts.html)

Now let's look at this example.

```python
def outer_function():
    global a
    a = 20
    def inner_function():
        global a
        a = 30
        print('a =', a)
    inner_function()
    print('a =', a)
a = 10
outer_function()
print('a =', a)
```

Can you guess the output from the above code? Here is what it is?

output is...
```
$ python scoping2.py
a = 30
a = 30
a = 30
```
From the code above, we can see how global references the top level `a`, therefore overwriting its initial value of 10.

## Python's nonlocal statement

There are times when we may want to access the scope in the hierarchy immediately above the one we are in.

```python
def outer_function():
    a = 20
    def inner_function():
        nonlocal a
        a = 30
        print('a =', a)

    inner_function()
    print('a =', a)
a = 10
outer_function()
print('a =', a)
```
[nonlocal1.py](nonlocal1.py)


Let's look at this following code. The following will produce and error. The inner_function nonlocal call will attempt to alter the outer function name `a`, but this outer function doesn't really have the name `a`, rather it too is attempting to alter it's enclosing namespace (the global environment). `nonlocal` does not chain well, in this case the first `nonlocal` reference will generate an error.

```python
def outer_function():
    nonlocal a
    a = 20
    def inner_function():
        nonlocal a
        a = 30
        print('a =', a)

    inner_function()
    print('a =', a)
a = 10
outer_function()
print('a =', a)
```
[nonlocal2.py](nonlocal1.py)


## Further reading on scoping and namespaces in python

Take a read of the following [link](http://sebastianraschka.com/Articles/2014_python_scope_and_namespaces.html) for more information on namespace and Python's scope resolution method.
