# Python Packages

Unlike many other languages, in python, the file structure becomes part of the structure of your program.

First, let's discuss python package management.

## Python standard library

Python includes a standard library of packages. A list of these can be found here https://docs.python.org/2/library/

Notice that we've seen a few of these already (i.e. math, json, shelve, sys, csv )

## Python package management with pip

We can extend our standard library by installing other packages (and also, create our own custom packages).

### PyPI

There are a plethora of useful packages available to download and assist you in  writing your Python program and achieving your objectives.

The Python community does a good job at organizing and distributing these packages through PyPI - the Python Package Index (https://pypi.python.org/pypi).

>The Python Package Index is a repository of software for the Python programming language. There are currently 85831 packages here.". The index is managed by the Python Software Foundationhttps://www.python.org/psf/)<

NOTE: Take a look around the PyPI. There are a great many useful packages to be found there. As we progress in this course, I'll have you download certain packages needed for our lectures.

### pip

Included with recent versions of python is the pip package management system (*Python 2.7.9 and later (on the python2 series), and Python 3.4 and later include pip (pip3 for Python 3) byefault*) . Pip is used to install and manage software packages written in Python. Using pip you can install packages that you have downloaded yourself, but mostly, you'll use pip to installackages from  the Python Package Index [PyPI](https://pypi.python.org/pypi).

To test that you have access to pip type the following command.

```
pip --version
```
As of this writing, the latest version is pip 9.0.1. You can always update to the latest version using the following command:

```
python -m pip install -U pip
```

PIP - pip is a recursive acronym that can stand for either "Pip Installs Packages" or "Pip Installs Python".

#### Install a package from the Python Package Index (PyPI)

Let's install a couple of useful packages from PyPI. Requests and BeautifulSoup4 packages help you 'screen scrape' (analyze and extract web page information) and process web content.

Using pip, we simply run the following commands.
```
pip install BeautifulSoup4
pip install requests
```

If successful, we should see something similar to what you see here:

```
$ pip install  BeautifulSoup4
Collecting BeautifulSoup4
  Downloading beautifulsoup4-4.5.1-py3-none-any.whl (83kB)
    100% |################################| 92kB 2.0MB/s
Installing collected packages: BeautifulSoup4
Successfully installed BeautifulSoup4-4.5.1
$ pip install requests
Collecting requests
  Downloading requests-2.11.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (514kB)
Installing collected packages: requests
Successfully installed requests-2.11.1
```

Let's now check our packages to make sure they have installed:

```
import bs4
import requests

webpage = requests.get("http://www.iastate.edu/")
soup = bs4.BeautifulSoup(webpage.text, "html.parser")
print(soup.title.string)
```
[import01.py](import01.py)

NOTE: In the above snippet of code, we download the ISU homepage, and print the specified title of this page from the HTML code that we downloaded.

#### Installing a package that doesn't exist on PyPI

Since many Python modules/packages require compiled code, PiPI and pip may not have the appropriate files for your particular version of operating system and platform. For Windows, you can find compiled versions of many common libraries (for instance, numpy and openCV -- which we'll be using later) in a library maintained by [Christoph Gohlke](http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/)see: http://www.lfd.uci.edu/~gohlke/pythonlibs/_). Christoph's site has various compiled versions of libraries for each Windows operating system (x32 vs x86, older windows, etc).

Such compiled libraries are contained within "wheel" files. To install, you simply download the file and run the command:

```
pip install whatever_the_name.whl
```

## Importing packages and using Modules

Unlike many other languages, in python, the file structure becomes part of the structure of your program.

Within python, the organization of your files matters.

### Importing: Simple Module Import

Notice the sample code we used in our previous pip install example (web scraping). We use pip to install python packages that we do not already have. Python includes packages, and we may also create our own. In all cases, if we wish to use functionality offered by these packages, we need to include some statement in our code to tell the Python interpreter that some outside code is needed.  We accomplish this task by using the import statement.

In this following example, I'll be importing and using contents of the 'time' package

```
import time
t0 = time.time()
for i in range(0, 10):
    print(i)
t1 = time.time()
print("The total time to execute this loop was " + str(t1-t0))
```
[import02.py](import02.py)

Notice how we reference any methods in the time package by using a fully qualified name, that is, time.whatevermethod()


By contrast, look at the following code.

```
from time import time
t0 = time()
for i in range(0, 10):
    print(i)
t1 = time()
print("The total time to execute this loop was " + str(t1-t0))
```
[import03.py](import03.py)

What is going on here?

In the second case, we imported one specific named object (in this case, a function called time) into our current namespace. In the first option, we imported the module but kept the namespace for the elements of this module under "time" - as a separate namespace.

Choosing one of the other is typically a matter of your own preferences. Over time, you may find the need for maintain a separate namespace for the  module your importing rare, and the pain of typing the fully qualified name (t time.time()) tedious. If so, you'll probably resort to using the second form of import more frequently.

NOTE: What you import gets run, but only the first time. Keep in mind that an `import` statement will find, then **run**, the code you are importing. It's often more efficient, therefore, to be selective in what you import. If a model you're importing contains many functions, and you only want to use one of them, use the from x import y form of import to reduce unnecessary code execution/processing. Also keep in mind that the imported code is only run once. If in another location in our program we do the import again (which is possible), the imported module/code will not be rerun.

### Changing the name of what you import.

You can also change the name of the object you are importing. You may want to do this to avoid a name collision (that is, the name of what you're importing is already used in the code into which you are importing the code), or you may wish to use a shorter name that requires less typing.

For whatever reason you may have, rest assured, Python provides a way for your to rename the objects you are importing.

```
from time import time as tmr
t0 = tmr()
for i in range(0, 10):
    print(i)
t1 = tmr()
print("The total time to execute this loop was " + str(t1-t0))
```
[import04.py](import04.py)

__NOTE__: This code above is a handy pattern - it allows you to test the speed of sections of code. This is especially handle when you have large data processing programs, as minor differences in how your approach your problem could mean huge differences in execution time.

# Namespaces and scoping

## Naming

A name is Python is roughly similar to variables as you've seen in past languages. Two things that are a bit different though are a) dynamic typing, and b) they always name an object (everything is  an object in Python).

As a bit of a review...

As you'd expect, you can give names to values:

```
v = 1<2
w = 122
x = 12.2
y = "this is a test"
z = [10, 9, 8]
```

The dynamic nature is illustrated in the following:

```
z = 12
z = "This is twelve"
z = [5,6,7]
```

Since all names in Python name an object, variable names can often be used to access a number of existing methods associated with the object.
```
z.append(8)
z.index(6)
```

## Names are mappings to objects

Names are simply mappings to, or references to, existing objects. This mapping exists in an namespace. The current namespace is like a dictionary that maps names to objects.

To list the attributes and methods found within our current environment we can use the dir function.

```
>>> w = 123
>>> dir(w)
['__abs__', '__add__', '__and__', '__bool__', '__ceil__', '__class__', '__delattr__', '__dir__', '__divmod__', '__doc__', '__eq__', '__float__', '__floor__', '__floordi
v__', '__format__', '__ge__', '__getattribute__', '__getnewargs__', '__gt__', '__hash__', '__index__', '__init__', '__int__', '__invert__', '__le__', '__lshift__', '__l
t__', '__mod__', '__mul__', '__ne__', '__neg__', '__new__', '__or__', '__pos__', '__pow__', '__radd__', '__rand__', '__rdivmod__', '__reduce__', '__reduce_ex__', '__rep
r__', '__rfloordiv__', '__rlshift__', '__rmod__', '__rmul__', '__ror__', '__round__', '__rpow__', '__rrshift__', '__rshift__', '__rsub__', '__rtruediv__', '__rxor__', '
__setattr__', '__sizeof__', '__str__', '__sub__', '__subclasshook__', '__truediv__', '__trunc__', '__xor__', 'bit_length', 'conjugate', 'denominator', 'from_bytes', 'im
ag', 'numerator', 'real', 'to_bytes']

```

Now, taking one of these names (bit_length) from this object, we can do the following

```
>>> w=123
>>> w.bit_length()
7
>>> w=255
>>> w.bit_length()
8
>>> w=34968
>>> w.bit_length()
16
```

As we have already seen previous, can we also get the actual physical memory address where a variable is stored:

```
>>> id(w)
2437876371344
```
