# Git Basic Local Workflow

NOTE: The following commands are meant to run in a bash terminal -- which is supplied with the standard install of git. Keep your terminal open, and:
* **When you have finished these commands**:
  * In the bash terminal window: right click, select all, and copy and paste the commands from this session in `notepad`
  * Submit the result at end of class for ICA02 (save it to use as a reference to help you remember how to do this in the future, and what problems you had).

## Setup the Project Folder

Using Windows Explorer, navigate to a location where you'll be storing you work for MIS407. Go into this folder, and right click and select "Git Bash" to open a bash terminal in that directory.

Once the terminal is open, execute these commands.

Create a test_git project:

```
pwd
mkdir test_git
cd test_git
pwd
```

Before we start using Git, you'll need to set some variables.

## Configure Git

Set your username and email address to use in commits:

```
git --version
git config --global user.name "John Doe"
git config --global user.email "jdoe@iastate.edu"
git config --global --list
```

## Initialize your first local repo

Create the repository and look at the results:

```
git init
ls -la
```
Once the repo is initialized, you should find a `.git` directory in the projects folder. **Never modify or delete any files in this directory!** It is managed by Git.

# Create a .gitignore file

Often our projects will contain files that we do not wish to track changes on (generally, we are interested in only tracking changes to the stuff we can read). We can tell git which files we want ignored using a `.gitignore` file. Create the file with a rule to exclude executable files:
```
echo "*.exe" >> .gitignore
ls -la
```
NOTE: for more info on `gitignore` see https://git-scm.com/docs/gitignore

## Let's create our first "commit" to this new repo

Now let's add a file to our project, and then add this file to our staging area. We can always check the status of our staging area using the `git status` command. It's a very handy command - use it often.

```
echo "Testing Git" >> test.txt
ls
cat test.txt
git status
git add test.txt
git status
```
For more info on the status command see: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-status

Now, let's commit the staging area to our repo.

```
git commit -m "My first commit for Project"
git status
```
NOTE: For more information on the commit command see: https://git-scm.com/docs/git-commit

## Make a second commit to project
```
echo "A second file added to my repo" >> test2.txt
ls
cat test2.txt
git status
git add test2.txt
git status
git commit -m "Add test2.txt"
git status
```

## Review our repo history

As we make more and more commits, we'll often want to examine the history of changes and commits made to the repo.

```
git log
git log --pretty=oneline
git log -p
```
For more information on querying Git repo history see: https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2/Git-Basics-Viewing-the-Commit-History

Before Monday, read section 1.1 through 1.3 of the ProGit online book
https://git-scm.com/book/en/v2
