# c11 Basic Input and output

## User input with input()

We've already seen how we can a program input via command line arguments, now let's look at Python's input function, which allows us to get user input.

```python
uname = input("Hello, what is your name: ")
print("Hello", uname) # accepts multiple string values
print("Hello ", uname, " nice to meet you.", sep='') # change separator space
print("Hello" + uname + "nice to meet you.") # and concatenation of strings
```

We can also get numbers, or other data format, but we need to be careful:

```python
mpg = input("Enter your car's mpg rating: ")
gallons = input("Enter the number of gallon's you think you have in your gas tank: ")
print("You could drive ", mpg*gallons, " miles with this amount of gas. What are you waiting for!")
```

Corrections to convert strings to floating values:

```python
mpg = float(input("Enter your car's mpg rating: "))
gallons = float(input("Enter the number of gallon's you think you have in your gas tank: "))
print("You could drive ", mpg*gallons, " miles with this amount of gas. What are you waiting for!")
```

> __NOTE:__ Python allows you to format strings in a very similar fashion to the printf statement found in C, C++, and Java. But Python also has the advanced "PyFormat" option as well (see: https://pyformat.info/, and also see https://docs.python.org/3/tutorial/inputoutput.html). Furthermore, a new string format approach was just introduced in Python 3.6 https://docs.python.org/3/whatsnew/3.6.html#whatsnew36-pep498

## Reading and writing files

Files are typically text, or binary, and structured or unstructured.

### Plaintext ("Text") files

Plaintext files only contain basic text characters and do not include information on font, size, or color. We typically see text files having the .txt extension, but Python script files ending with the .py extension are also examples of plaintext files. These text files can be opened with Windows’s Notepad or OS X’s TextEdit application. Using Python you can read the contents of plaintext files and treat them as an ordinary string values.

### Writing Text Files

* Create/overwrite mode:

```python
file = open("test.txt", "w") # open file, create if new and overwrite if exists
file.write("Hello world!")
file.write("...and yadda yadda yadda.")
file.close()
```
[text_file1.py](sample_code/text_file1.py)

Using the command prompt we can run this script and view it's results:
```
$ cat test.txt
Hello world!...and yadda yadda yadda.
```

* Append mode:

```python
file = open("test.txt", "a")
file.write("Hello World again")
file.close()
```
[text_file2.py](sample_code/text_file2.py)

Now, we find the text appended to our file:
```
cat test.txt
Hello world!...and yadda yadda yadda.Hello World again
```

Let's add more lines:

```python
file = open("test.txt", "a")
file.write("\n\nHello World again, and again\n")
file.close()
```
[text_file3.py](sample_code/text_file3.py)


...And the output:

```
$ cat test.txt
Hello world!...and yadda yadda yadda.Hello World again

Hello World again, and again
```

### Using With statement

It's good to develop the habit of using the `with` statement. Using the `with` statement we don't have to remember to close the file! It will be automatically closed for us.

```python
with open("test.txt", "a") as file:
  for x in range(0, 10):
    file.write(str(x) + "\n")
```
[text_file4.py](sample_code/text_file4.py)

...and the output of which is:

```
$ cat test.txt
Hello world!...and yadda yadda yadda.Hello World again

Hello World again, and again
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
```

### Reading Text Files

Reading text files is similar to the write. We'll use the `with` statement for our examples here.

If you want to read the entire file contents into a string, use the read function
```python
with open("test.txt", "r") as file:
  content = file.read()
print(content)
```
[text_file5.py](sample_code/text_file5.py)

The output of which would be our entire text file:

```
$ python text_file5.py
Hello world!...and yadda yadda yadda.Hello World again

Hello World again, and again
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
```

__NOTE1__: *Files and pathnames*: When referencing a file that is in the current directory of the script, we only need to provide the filename. When we need to reference a file that is located in another directory, we will need to provide the *path* along with the filename. There are differences between Windows and MacOS in how pathnames are expressed. We will be using the Windows version in this course, which uses the drive letter and backslash format (i.e. `C:\folder\subfolder\filename.txt`). MacOS and Linux use forward slash, and may not use drive letter references - for instance, in MacOS "/Volumes" folder, and in Linux, "/mnt". If you are using one of these other platforms, you will need to translate these path references to your particular platform. Python does have built in library support to handle many of these issues - see os.path found here https://docs.python.org/3/library/os.path.html.

__NOTE2__: Since the backslash character used in Windows pathnames is an escape character used in string formatting, we need to double the backslash as in the following example: `"c:\\users\\bob\\file.txt"`

__SIDEBAR__ One very useful facility/function in Python is regular the expressions package, `re`. We'll probably revisit this in greater detail in the "data wrangling" portion of the course later, but for now, you can look into this powerful concept by reading this intro [here](https://developers.google.com/edu/python/regular-expressions), and the interactive exercise [here](https://regexone.com/lesson/introduction_abcs)

### Binary files

Unlike plaintext files, binary files contain information that is not constrained to text. Binary files store information as binary data, and the interpretation of this data is generally very proprietary, or context specific. We will not be dealing much with binary files in this course, but you should be aware of them and how to deal with them when needed. Also, some file formats, such as Python's `shelve` format (used to store Python objects) also use a binary format.  

(if you find that you need to work with binary files, for further information look [here](https://www.safaribooksonline.com/library/view/python-cookbook-3rd/9781449357337/ch05s04.html and section 7.2.1) or  [here](https://docs.python.org/3.6/tutorial/inputoutput.html) )
